Second Morrill Act of 1890, ch. 841, 26 Stat. 417
=================================================
Date: 1890-08-30
Source fetched: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-26/pdf/STATUTE-26-Pg417-2.pdf
Public-domain basis: US statute (Statutes at Large). Edicts of government; also a work of the United States Government, 17 U.S.C. 105.
Note: The statute that funded and created the public 1890 land-grant institutions, most of them HBCUs, by barring the distribution of funds to states that made a race distinction in admissions unless separate institutions were maintained. Extracted from the govinfo scan of Statutes at Large vol. 26 with pdftotext -layout; adjacent chapters printed on the same pages are included.
Retrieved: 2026-08-10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. 841.—An act to apply a portion of the proceeds of the public lands to the   August 30,1890.
more complete endowment and support of the colleges for the benefit of agricult-
ure and the mechanic arts established under the provisions of an act of Congress
-approved July second, eighteen hundred and sixty-two.

  Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
 United States of America in Congress assembled, That there shall be, ceeds.
                                                                          Public lands p r o -
and hereby is, annually appropriated, out of any money in the Treas- Agricultural, etc.,
ury not otherwise appropriated, arising from the sales of public lands, colleges.
                                                                         Increased annual ap-
to be paid as hereinafter provided, to each State and Territory for propriations to States
                                                                        and Territories for
the more complete endowment and maintenance of colleges for the more complete endow-
benefit of agriculture and the mechanic arts now established, or ment, etc., of.
which may be hereafter established, in accordance with an act of
Congress approved July second, eighteen hundred and sixty-two, Vol. 12. pp. 503-505.
        STAT L—VOL XXVI------- 27
418                    FIFTY-FIRST CONGRESS.                 Sess . I.   Ch . 841.   1890.

   Appropriation for the sum of fifteen thousand dollars for the year ending June thir-
year ending June 30,
1890.                  tieth, eighteen hundred and ninety, and an annual increase of the-
   Increasing annual amount of such appropriation thereafter for ten years by an addi-
appropriation for ten
years.                 tional sum of one thousand dollars over the preceding year, and the
   Annual appropria- annual amount to be paid thereafter to each State and Territory shall
  Expenditure limited. be twenty-five thousand dollars to be applied only to instruction in
tion thereafter.
                         agriculture, the mechanic arts, the English language and the various-
                         branches of mathematical, physical, natural and economic science,
                         with special reference to their applications in the industries of life,
  Provisos.              and to the facilities for such instruction: Provided, That no money
                         shall be paid out under this act to any State or Territory for the
  N o distinction o f support and maintenance of a college where a distinction of race or
race, etc., in any one
college.                 color is made in the admission of students, but the establishment
  Separate colleges for and maintenance of such colleges separately for white and colored
white and colored stu-
dents.                   students shall be held to be a compliance with the provisions of this-
                         act if the funds received in such State or Territory be equitably
  Division of funds in divided as hereinafter set forth: Provided, That in any State in
certain cases.
   Vol. 12, pp. 503-505. which there has been one college established in pursuance of the act
                         of July second, eighteen hundred and sixty-two, and also in which
                         an educational institution of like character has been established, or
                         may be hereafter established, and is now aided by such State from
                         its own revenue, for the education of colored students in agriculture-
                         and the mechanic arts, however named or styled, or whether or not
                         it has received money heretofore under the act to which this act is an
   Legislative proposi- amendment, the legislature of such State may propose and report to-
tion and report of
equitable, etc., divis- the Secretary of the Interior a just and equitable division of the fund
ion.                     to be received under this act between one college for white students-
                         and one institution for colored students established as aforesaid,
                         which shall be divided into two parts and paid accordingly, and
                         thereupon such institution for colored students shall be entitled to-
                         the benefits of this act and subject to its provisions, as much as it
                         would have been if it had been included under the act of eighteen
                         hundred and sixty-two, and the fulfillment of the foregoing provis-
   Compliance with ions shall be taken as a compliance with the provision in reference-
law.
                         to separate colleges for white and colored students.
  Time, manner, etc.,
of annual payments to
                            Sec . 2. That the sums hereby appropriated to the States and
State or Territorial Territories for the further endowment and support of colleges shall
treasurer, etc.
                         be annually paid on or before the thirty-first day of July of each
                         year, by the Secretary of the Treasury, upon the warrant of the-
                         Secretary of the Interior, out of the Treasury of the United States,
                         to the State or Territorial treasurer, or to such officer as shall be
                         designated by the laws of such State or Territory to receive the
                         same, who shall, upon the order of the trustees of the college, or the
urers of colleges or institution for colored students, immediately pay over said sums to
  Payments to treas-
other institutions.      the treasurers of the respective colleges or other institutions entitled
  Annual financial re-
ports to Secretaries of to receive the same, and such treasurers shall be required to report
Agriculture and the to the Secretary of Agriculture and to the Secretary of the Interior,
Interior.
                         on or before the first day of September of each year, a detailed state-
                         ment of the amount so received and of its disbursement. The grants
  Money-grants sub-
ject to legislative as- of moneys authorized by this act are made subject to the legislative
sent.                    assent of the several States and Territories to the purpose of said
  Proviso.
                         grants: Provided, That payments of such installments of the appro-
due, to be paid on as- tion herein made as shall become due to any State before the adjourn-
  Certain installments
sent of Governor, etc. ment of the regular session of legislature meeting next after the
                         passage of this act shall be made upon the assent of the governor
                         thereof, duly certified to the Secretary of the Treasury.
  Diminution of fund
to be made up by            Sec . 3. That if any portion of the moneys received by the desig-
State, etc.              nated officer of the State or Territory for the further and more
                         complete endowment, support, and maintenance of colleges, or of
                         institutions for colored students, as provided in this act, shall, by
                         any action or contingency, be diminished or lost, or be misapplied,
   FIFTY-FIRST CONGRESS.                Sess . I.   Chs . 841, 854.    1890.                   419
it shall be replaced by the State or Territory to which it belongs,
and until so replaced no subsequent appropriation shall be appor- Limitation upon sub-
tioned or paid to such State or Territory; and no portion of said moneys sequent payments.
shall be applied, directly or indirectly, under any pretense whatever, No portion to be ap-
to the purchase, erection, preservation, or repair of any building or plied to buildings.
buildings. An annual report by the president of each of said col- Annual report of
                                                                                   to Secretaries
leges shall be made to the Secretary of Agriculture, as well as to the colleges
                                                                         of Agriculture and the
Secretary of the Interior, regarding the condition and progress of       Interior.
each college, including statistical information in relation to its re-
ceipts and expenditures, its library, the number of its students and
professors, and also as to any improvements and experiments made
under the direction of any experiment stations attached to said col-
leges, with their cost and results, and such other industrial and
economical statistics as may be regarded as useful, one copy of which Exchanges of college
shall be transmitted by mail free to all other colleges further en- reports, mail free.
dowed under this act.
   Sec . 4. That on or before the first day of July in each year, after Annual ascertain-
the passage of this act, the Secretary of the Interior shall ascertain ment    and certification
                                                                         of amounts, etc., due
and certify to the Secretary of the Treasury as to each State and        to States,  etc.
Territory whether it is entitled to receive its share of the annual
appropriation for colleges, or of institutions for colored students,
under this act, and the amount which thereupon each is entitled,
respectively, to receive. If the Secretary of the Interior shall with- Withheld certifi-
hold a certificate from any State or Territory of its appropriation cates.
the facts and reasons therefor shall be reported to the President, Secretary of Interior
                                                                             report facts to
and the amount involved shall be kept separate in the Treasury un- to    President, etc.
til the close of the next Congress, in order that the State or Terri- Appeal from Secre-
tory may, if it should so desire, appeal to Congress from the deter- tary      of Interior to
                                                                         Congress.
mination of the Secretary of the Interior. If the next Congress amount     Congress failing,
                                                                                   to be covered
shall not direct such sum to be paid it shall be covered into the in.
Treasury. And the Secretary of the Interior is hereby charged to administerSecretary   of Interior
                                                                                          the law.
with the proper administration of this law.
   Sec . 5. That the Secretary of the Interior shall annually report to    Annual     report    to
                                                                         Congress as to dis-
Congress the disbursements which have been made in all the States bursement,            withhold-
and Territories, and also whether the appropriation of any State or ing, etc.
Territory has been withheld, and if so, the reasons therefor.
   Sec . 6. Congress may at any time amend, suspend, or repeal any Amendment, etc.
or all of the provisions of this act.
   Approved, August 30, 1890.
