Voting Rights Act of 1965, Pub. L. 89-110, 79 Stat. 437
=======================================================
Date: 1965-08-06
Source fetched: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-79/pdf/STATUTE-79-Pg437.pdf
Public-domain basis: US statute (Statutes at Large). Edicts of government; also a work of the United States Government, 17 U.S.C. 105.
Note: Full text as enrolled, 79 Stat. 437-446, extracted from the govinfo scan of the U.S. Statutes at Large with pdftotext -layout.
Retrieved: 2026-08-10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

79 STAT. ]      PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                                                437
      SPECIAL PROJECT GRANTS FOR COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES

  SEC. 5. The first sentence of subsection (a) of section 316 of such
Act is amended by striking out "first five fiscal years ending after           75 Stat. 824.
                                                                               42 u s e 247a.
June 30, 1961" and inserting in lieu thereof "first six fiscal years
ending after June 30,1961".
  Approved August 5, 1965.


Public Law 89-110
                                  AN A C T                                     August 6, 1965
To enforce the fifteenth amendment to the Constitution of the United States,     l^^' ^^^'^^
                           and for other purposes.

   Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled^ That this Act shall A^t°lf"i9^5^'^*^
be known as the "Voting Rights Act of 1965".
   SEC. 2. No voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard,
practice, or procedure shall be imposed or applied by any State or
political subdivision to deny or abridge the right of any citizen of
the United States to vote on account of race or color.
   SEC. 3. (a) Whenever the Attorney General institutes a proceeding ^^^5'*'''^^^ ''^'"^'
under any statute to enforce the guarantees of the fifteenth amend-
ment in any State or political subdivision the court shall authorize
the appointment of Federal examiners by the United States Civil
Service Commission in accordance with section 6 to serve for such
period of time and for such political subdivisions as the court shall
determine is appropriate to enforce the guarantees of the fifteenth
amendment (1) as part of any interlocutory order if the court deter-
mines that the appointment of such examiners is necessary to enforce
such guarantees or (2) as part of any final judgment if the court finds
that violations of the fifteenth amendment justifying equitable relief
have occurred in such State or subdivision: Provided^ That the court
need not authorize the appointment of examiners if any incidents of           ,
denial or abridgement of the right to vote on account of race or color
 (1) have been few in number and have been promptly and effectively
corrected by State or local action, (2) the continuing effect of such
incidents has been eliminated, and (3) there is no reasonable proba-
bility of their recurrence in the future.
    (b) If in a proceeding instituted by the Attorney General under
any statute to enforce the .guarantees of the fifteenth amendment in
any State or political subdivision the court finds that a test or device
has been used for the purpose or with the effect of denying or abridg-
ing the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account
of race or color, it shall suspend the use of tests and devices in such
State or political subdivisions as the court shall determine is appro-
priate and for such period as it deems necessary.
    (c) If in any proceeding instituted by the Attorney General under
any statute to enforce the guarantees of the fifteenth amendment in
any State or political subdivision the court finds that violations of the
fifteenth amendment justifying equitable relief have occurred within
the territory of such State or political subdivision, the court, in
addition to such relief as it may grant, ishall retain jurisdiction for
such period as it may deem appropriate and during such period no
voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard, practice,
or procedure with respect to voting different from that in force or
effect at the time the proceeding was commenced shall be enforced
unless and until the court finds that such qualification, prerequisite,
standard, practice, or procedure does not have the purpose and will
not have the effect of denying or abridging the right to vote on
438                                         PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                [79 STAT.

                             account of race or color: Provided^ That such qualification, pre-
                             requisite, standard, practice, or procedure may be enforced if the
                             qualification, prerequisite, standard, practice, or procedure has been
                             submitted by the chief legal officer or other appropriate oflEicial of.
                             such State or subdivision to the Attorney General and the Attorney
                             General has not interposed an objection within sixty days after such
                             submission, except that neither the court's finding nor the Attorney
                             General's failure to object shaill bar a subsequent action to enjoin
                             enforcement of such qualification, prerequisite, standard, practice, or
                             procedure.
   Use of t e s t s or
d e v i c e s pro-              SEC. 4. (a) To assure that the right of citizens of the United States
hibited.                     to vote is not denied or abridged on account of race or color, no
   Declaratory               citizen shall be denied the right to vote in any Federal, State, or local
judgment pro-
ceedings.                    election because of his failure to comply with any test or device in any
                             State with respect to which the determinations have been made under
                             subsection (b) or in any political subdivision with respect to which
                             such determinations have been made as a separate unit, unless the
                             United States District Court for the District of Columbia in an
                             action for a declaratory judgment brought by such State or sub-
                             division against the United States has determined that no such test
                             or device has been used during the five years preceding the filing of
                             the action for the purpose or with the effect of denying or abridging
                             the right to vote on account of race or color: Promded^ That no such
                             declaratory judgment shall issue with respect to any plaintiff for a
                             period of five years after the entry of a final judgment of any court
                             of the United States, other than the denial of a declaratory judgment
                             under this section, whether entered prior to or after the enactment of
                             this Act, determining that denials or abridgments of the right to vote
                             on account of race or color through the use of such tests or devices
                             have occurred anywhere in the territory of such plaintiff.
                                An action pursuant to this subsection shall be heard and determined
                             by a court of three judges in accordance with the provisions of sec-
   62 Stat. 968.             tion 2284 of title 28 of the United States Code and any appeal shall
                             lie to the Supreme Court. The court shall retain jurisdiction of any
                             action pursuant to this subsection for five years after judgment and
                             shall reopen the action upon motion of the Attorney General alleging
                             that a test or device has been used for the purpose or with the effect of
                             denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race or color.
                                If the Attorney General determines that he has no reason to
                             believe that any such test or device has been used during the five
                             years preceding the filing of the action for the purpose or with the
                             effect of denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race
                             or color, he shall consent to the entry of such judgment.
                                 (b) The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply in any State or in
                             any political subdivision of a state which (1) the Attorney General
                             determines maintained on November 1, 1964, any test or device, and
                              with respect to which (2) the Director of the Census determines
                             that less than 50 per centum of the persons of voting age residing
                             therein were registered on November 1, 1964, or that less than 50
                             per centum of such persons voted in the presidential election of
                              November 1964.
  P u b l i c a t i o n in      A determination or certification of the Attorney General or of the
Federal Register,
                             Director of the Census under this section or under section 6 or
                             section 13 shall not be reviewable in any court and shall be effective
                             upon publication in the Federal Register.
  " T e s t or de-              (c) The phrase "test or device" shall mean any requirement that
vice."
                             a person as a prerequisite for voting or registration for voting (1)
                              demonstrate the ability to read, write, understand, or interpret any
                             matter, (2) demonstrate any educational achievement or his knowl-
79 STAT.]      PUBLIC LA\V 8 9 - 1 1 0 - A U G U S T 6, 1965                           439
eda:e of any particular subject, (3) possess good moral character, or
 (4) prove his qualifications by the voucher of registered voters or
members of any other class.
    (d) For purposes of this section no State or political subdivision
shall be determined to have engaged in the use of tests or devices
for the purpose or with the effect of denying or abridging the right
to vote on account of race or color if (1) incidents of such use
have been few in number and have been promptly and effectively
corrected by State or local action, (2) the continuing effect of such
incidents has been eliminated, and (3) there is no reasonable prob-
 ability of their recurrence in the future.
    (e) (1) Congress hereby declares that to secure the rights under the
fourteenth amendment of persons educated in American-flag schools
 in which the predominant classroom language was other than English,
 it is necessary to prohibit the States from conditioning the right to
 vote of such persons on ability to read, write, understand, or interpret
 any matter in the English language.
     (2) No person who demonstrates that he has successfully completed
 the sixth primary grade in a public school in, or a private school
accredited by, any State or territory, the District of Columbia, or the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in which the predominant classroom
 language was other than English, shall be denied the right to vote
 in any Federal, State, or local election because of his inability to read,
 write, understand, or interpret any matter in the English language,
 except that in States in which State law provides that a different level
 of education is presumptive of literacy, he shall demonstrate that he
 has successfully completed an equivalent level of education in a public
 school in, or a private school accredited by, any State or territory, the
 District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in which
 the predominant classroom language was other than English.
    SEC. 5. Whenever a State or political subdivision with respect to
which the prohibitions set forth in section 4(a) are in effect shall
enact or seek to administer any voting qualification or prerequisite to
voting, or standard, practice, or procedure with respect to voting
different from that in force or effect on November 1, 1964, such
State or subdivision may institute an action in the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia for a declaratory judg-
ment that such qualification, prerequisite, standard, practice, or
procedure does not have the purpose and will not have the effect of
denying or abridging the right tx) vote on account of race or color,
and unless and until the court enters such judgment no person shall
be denied the right to vote for failure to comply with such qualifi-
cation, prerequisite, standard, practice, or procedure: Provided^
That such qualification, prerequisite, standard, practice, or procedure
may be enforced without such proceeding if the qualification, pre-
requisite, standard, practice, or procedure has been submitted by
the chief legal officer or other appropriate official of such State or
subdivision to the Attorney General and the Attorney General has
not interposed an objection within sixty days after such submission,
except that neither the Attorney General's failure to object nor a
declaratory judgment entered under this section shall bar a subse-
quent action to enjoin enforcement of such qualification, prerequisite,
standard, practice, or procedure. iVny action under this section shall
be heard and determined by a court of three judges in accordance
with the provisions of section 2284 of title 28 of the United States
Code and any appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court.                         ^2 stat. 968.
   SEC. 6. Whenever (a) a court has authorized the appointment of Appointment of
examiners pursuant to the provisions of section 3 ( a ) , or (b) unless ^'^'"^"^'•^*
a declaratory judgment has been rendered under section 4 ( a ) , the
440                                     PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                [79   STAT.

                        Attorney General certifies with respect to any political subdivision
                        named in, or included within the scope of, determinations made
                        under section 4(b) that (1) he has received complaints in writ-
                        ing from twenty or more residents of such political subdivision
                        alleging that they have been denied the right to vote under color of
                        law on account of race or color, and that he believes such complaints
                        to be meritorious, or (2) that in his judgment (considering, among
                        other factors, whether the ratio of nonwhite persons to white persons
                        registered to vote within such subdivision appears to him to be reason-
                        ably attributable to violations of the fifteenth amendment or whether
                        substantial evidence exists that bona fide efforts are being m.ade within
                        such subdivision to comply with the fifteenth amendment), the
                        appointment of examiners is otherwise necessary to enforce the
                        guarantees of the fifteenth amendment, the Civil Service Commission
                        shall appoint as many examiners for such subdivision as it may deem
                        appropriate to prepare and maintain lists of persons eligible to vote
                        in Federal, State, and local elections. Such examiners, hearing
                        officers provided for in section 9 ( a ) , and other persons deemed neces-
                        sary by the Commission to carry out the provisions and purposes of
                        this Act shall be appointed, compensated, and separated without
                        regard to the provisions of any statute administered by the Civil
                        Service Commission, and service under this Act shall not be con-
                        sidered employment for the purposes of any statute administered by
                        the Civil Service Commission, except the provisions of section 9 of the
  53 Stat. 1148;        Act of August 2, 1939, as amended (5 U.S.C. 118i), prohibiting parti-
64 Stat. 475.
                        san political activity: Provided, That the Commission is authorized,
                        after consulting the head of the appropriate department or agency, to
                        designate suitable persons in the official service of the United States,
                        with their consent, to serve in these positions. Examiners and hear-
                        ing officers shall have the power to administer oaths.
 Duties of ex-             ISEC. 7. (a) The examiners for each political subdivision shall, at
aminers.
                        such places as the Civil Service Commission shall by regulation desig-
                        nate, examine applicants concerning their qualifications for voting.
                        An application to an examiner shall be in such form as the Commission
                        may require and shall contain allegations that the applicant is not
                        otherwise registered to vote.
  L i s t of eligible       (b) Any person whom the examiner finds, in accordance with
voters.
                        instructions received under section 9 (b), to have the qualifications pre-
                        scribed by State law not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws
                        of the United States shall promptly be placed on a list of eligible
                        voters. A challenge to such listing may be made in accordance with
                        section 9(a) and shall not be the basis for a prosecution under section
                        12 of this Act. The examiner shall certify and transmit such list,
                        and any supplements as appropriate, at least once a month, to the
                        offices of the appropriate election officials, with copies to the Attorney
                        General and the attorney general of the Stat©, and any such lists and
                        supplements thereto transmitted during the month shall be available
                        for public inspection on the last business day of the month and in
                        any event not later than the forty-fifth day prior to any election.
                        The appropriate State or local election official shall place such names
                        on the official voting list. Any person whose name appears on the
                        examiner's list shall be entitled and allowed to vote in the election
                        district of his residence unless and until the appropriate election
                        officials shall have been notified that such person has been removed
                        from such list in accordance with subsection (d) : Provided, That no
                        person shall be entitled to vote in any election by virtue of this Act
79 STAT.]       PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                                     441

unless his name shall have been certified and transmitted on such a list
to the offices of the appropriate election officials at least forty-five days
prior to such election.
    (c) The examiner shall issue to each person whose name appears
on such a list a certificate evidencing his eligibility to vote.
    (d) A person whose name appears on such a list shall be removed
therefrom by an examiner if (1) such person has been successfully
challenged in accordance with the procedure prescribed in section 9,
or (2) he has been determined by an examiner to have lost his eligi-
bility to vote under State law not inconsistent with the Constitution
and the laws of the United States.
    SEC. 8. Whenever an examiner is serving under this Act in any poli- observers at
tical subdivision, the Civil Service Commission may assign, at the
request of the Attorney General, one or more persons, who may be
officers of the United States, (1) to enter and attend at any place for
holding an election in such subdivision for the purpose of observing
whether persons who are entitled to vote are being permitted to vote,
and (2) to enter and attend at any place for tabulating the votes cast
at any election held in such subdivision for the purpose of observing
whether votes cast by persons entitled to vote are being properly tabu-
lated. Such persons so assigned shall report to an examiner appointed
for such political subdivision, to the Attorney General, and if the
appointment of examiners has been authorized pursuant to section
3 ( a ) , to the court.
   SEC. 9. (a) Any challenge to a listing on an eligibility list pre- i'?^^b^\^r^fstui s
pared by an examiner shall be heard and determined by a hearing L^arings.^
officer appointed by and responsible to the Civil Service Commission
and under such rules as the Commission shall by regulation pre-
scribe. Such challenge shall be entertained only if filed at such
office within the State as the Civil Service Commission shall by
regulation designate, and within ten days after the listing of the
challenged person is made available for public inspection, and if
suported by (1) the affidavits of at least two persons having personal
knowledge of the facts constituting grounds for the challenge, and (2)
a certification that a copy of the challenge and affidavits have been
served by mail or in person upon the person challenged at his place
of residence set out in the application. Such challenge shall be
determined within fifteen days after it has been filed. A petition
for review of the decision of the hearing officer may be filed in the
United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the person
challenged resides within fifteen days after service of such decision
by mail on the person petitioning for review but no decision of a
hearing officer shall be reversed unless clearly erroneous. Any person
listed shall be entitled and allowed to vote pending final determi-
nation by the hearing officer and by the court.
    (b) The times, places, procedures, and form for application and Procedural
listing pursuant to this Act and removals from the eligibility lists '"^8"^®*^^°"®-
shall be prescribed by regulations promulgated by the Civil Service
Commission and the Commission shall, after consultation with the
Attorney General, instruct examiners concerning applicable State
law not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United
States with respect to (1) the qualifications required for listing, and
 (2) loss of eligibility to vote.
    (c) Upon the request of the applicant or the challenger or on its subpena power.
own motion the Civil Service Commission shall have the power to
require by subpena the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the


   49-850 0-66—31
442                               PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                [79 STAT.

                   production of documentary evidence relating to any matter pending
                   before it under the authority of this section. I n case of contumacy or
                   refusal to obey a subpena, any district court of the United States or
                   the United States court of any territory or possession, or the District
                   Court of the United States for the District of Columbia, within the
                   jurisdiction of which said person guilty of contumacy or refusal to obey
                   is found or resides or is domiciled or transacts business, or has
                   appointed an agent for receipt of service of process, upon application
                   by the Attorney General of the United States shall have jurisdiction
                   to issue to such person an order requiring such person to appear before
                   the Commission or a hearing officer, there to produce pertinent, rele-
                   vant, and nonprivileged documentary evidence if so ordered, or there
                   to give testimony touching the matter under investigation; and any
                   failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by said court
                   as a contempt thereof.
  pon tax.            gj,^, 20. (a) The Congress finds that the requirement of the pay-
                   ment of a poll tax as a precondition to voting (i) precludes persons
                   of limited means from voting or imposes unreasonable financial hard-
                   ship upon such persons as a precondition to their exercise of the
                   franchise, (ii) does not bear a reasonable relationship to any legiti-
                   mate State interest in the conduct of elections, and (iii) in some
                   areas has the purpose or effect of denying persons the right to vote
                   because of race or color. Upon the basis of these findings. Congress
                   declares that the constitutional right of citizens to vote is denied or
                   abridged in some areas by the requirement of the payment of a poll
                   tax as a precondition to voting.
                       (b) In the exercise of the powers of Congress under section 6 of
                   the fourteenth amendment and section 2 of the fifteenth amend-
                   ment, the Attorney General is authorized and directed to institute
                   forthwith in the name of the United States such actions, including
                   actions against States or political subdivisions, for declaratory judg-
                   ment or injunctive relief against the enforcement of any requirement
                   of the payment of a poll tax as a precondition to voting, or substi-
                   tute therefor enacted after November 1, 1964, as will be necessary
                   to implement the declaration of subsection (a) and the purposes of
                   this section.
                       (c) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdic-
                   tion of such actions which shall be heard and determined by a court
                   of three judges in accordance with the provisions of section 2284 of
  62 Stat. 9 68.    title 28 of the United States Code and any appeal shall lie to the Su-
                   preme Court. It shall be the duty of the judges designated to hear
                   the case to assign the case for hearing at the earliest practicable date,
                   to participate in the hearing and determination thereof, and to cause
                   the case to be in every way expedited.
                       (d) During the pendency of such actions, and thereafter if the
                   courts, notwithstanding this action by the Congress, should declare
                   the requirement of the payment of a poll tax to be constitutional, no
                   citizen of the United States who is a resident of a State or political
                   subdivision with respect to which determinations have been made
                   under subsection 4(b) and a declaratory judgment has not been
                   entered under subsection 4 ( a ) , during the first year he becomes
                   otherwise entitled to vote by reason of registration by State or local
                   officials or listing by an examiner, shall be denied the right to vote
79 STAT.]       PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                                               443

for failure to pay a poll tax if he tenders payment of such tax for the
current year to an examiner or to the appropriate State or local official
at least forty-five days prior to election, whether or not such tender
would be timely or adequate under State law. An examiner shall
have authority to accept such payment from any person authorized by
this Act to make an application for listing, and shall issue a receipt
for such payment. The examiner shall transmit promptly any such
poll tax payment to the office of the State or local official authorized to
receive such payment under State law, together with the name and
 address of the applicant.
    SEC. 11. (a) No person acting under color of law shall fail or refuse     Prohibitions.
 to permit any person to vote who is entitled to vote under any pro-
 vision of this Act or is otherwise qualified to vote, or willfully fail
 or refuse to tabulate, count, and report such person's vote.
    (b) No person, whether acting under color of law or otherwise,
 shall intimidate, threaten, or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten,
 or coerce any person for voting or attempting to vote, or intimidate,
 threaten, or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce any
 person for urging or aiding any person to vote or attempt to vote,
 or intimidate, threaten, or coerce any person for exercising any powers
 or duties under section 3 ( a ) , 6,8,9,10, or 12 (e).
    (c)Whoever knowingly or willfully gives false information as to           Penalty.
 his name, address, or period of residence in the voting district for the
 purpose of establishing his eligibility to register or vote, or conspires
 with another individual for the purpose of encouraging his false regis-
 tration to vote or illegal voting, or pays or offers to pay or accepts
 payment either for registration to vote or for voting shall be fined
 not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both :
 Provided^ hoioever^ That this provision shall be applicable only to          Applicability.
 general, special, or primary elections held solely or in part for the
 purpose of selecting or electing any candidate for the office of Presi-
 dent, Vice President, presidential elector, Member of the United States
 Senate, Member of the United States House of Representatives, or
 Delegates or Commissioners from the territories or possessions, or
 Resident Commissioner of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
    (d) Whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of an examiner
 or hearing officer knowingly and willfully falsifies or conceals a
 material fact, or makes any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements
 or representations, or makes or uses any false w^riting or documeni:
 knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent state-
 ment or entry, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not
 more than five years, or both.
    SEC. 12. (a) Whoever shall deprive or attempt to deprive any per-
 son of any right secured by section 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, or 10 or shall violate
 section 11 (a) or (b), shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned
 not more than five years, or both.
    (b) Whoever, within a year following an election in a political sub-
 division in which an examiner has been appointed (1) destroys,
defaces, mutilates, or otherwise alters the marking of a paper ballot
which has been cast in such election, or (2) alters any official record
of voting in such election tabulated from a voting machine or other-
wise, shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than
five years, or both.
444                               PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                   [79 STAT.

                         (c) Whoever conspires to violate the provisions of subsection (a) or
                      (b) of this section, or interferes with any right secured by section 2,
                      3, 4, 6, 7, 10, or 11 (a) or (b) shall be fined not more than $5,000, or
                     imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
  Injunctions, etc.      (d) Whenever any person has engaged or there are reasonable
                     grounds to believe that any person is about to engage in any act or
                     practice prohibited by section 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, or subsection (b) of
                     this section, the Attorney General may institute for the United States,
                     or in the name of the United States, an action for preventive relief,
                     including an application for a temporary or permanent injunction,
                     restraining order, or other order, and including an order directed to
                     the State and State or local election officials to require them (1) to
                     permit persons listed under this 'Act to vote and (2) to count such
                     votes.
                         (e) Whenever in any political subdivision in which there are exam-
                     iners appointed pursuant to this Act any persons allege to such an
                     examiner within forty-ei^ht hours after the closing of the polls that
                     notwithstanding (1) their listing under this Act or registration by
                     an appropriate election official and (2) their eligibility to vote, they
                     have not been permitted to vote in such election, the examiner shall
                     forthwith notify the Attorney General if such allegations in his
                     opinion appear to be well founded. Upon receipt of such notification,
                    the Attorney General may forthwith file with the district court an
                    application for an order providing for the marking, casting, and count-
                     ing of the ballots of such persons and requiring the inclusion of their
                    votes in the total vote before the results of such election shall be deemed
                    final and any force or effect given thereto. The district court shall
                    hear and determine such matters immediately after the filing of such
                    application. The remedy provided in this subsection shall not pre-
                    clude any remedy available under State or Federal law.
                        (f) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction
                    of proceedings instituted pursuant to this section and shall exercise the
                    same without regard to whether a person asserting rights under the
                    provisions of this Act shall have exhausted any administrative or
                    other remedies that may be provided by law.
  Listing proce-        SEC. 13. Listing procedures shall be terminated in any political S|Ub-
dures, termination.
                    division of any State (a) with respect to examiners appointed pursuant
                    to clause (b) of section 6 whenever the Attorney General notifies the
                    Civil Service Commission, or whenever the District Court for the
                    District of Columbia determines in an action for declaratory judgment
                    brought by any political subdivision with respect to which the Director
                    of the Census has, determined that more than 50 per centum of the
                    nonwhite persons of voting age residing therein are registered to
                    vote, (1) that all persons listed by an examiner for such subdivision
                    have Ibeen placed on the appropriate voting registration roll, and
                     (2) that there is no longer reasonable cause to believe that persons
                    will be deprived of or denied the right to vote on account of race or
                    color in such subdivision, and (b), with respect to examiners appointed
                    pursuant to section 3 ( a ) , upon order of the authorizing court. A
                    political subdivision may petition the Attorney General for the termi-
                    nation of listing procedures under clause (a) of this section, and may
                    petition the Attorney General to request the Director of the Census to
                    take such survey or census as may be appropriate for the making of
                    the determination provided for in this section. The District Court
                    for the District of Columbia shall have jurisdiction to require such
79 STAT.]      PUBLIC LAW 89-110-AUGUST 6, 1965                                        445
                                                                                 #
survey or census to be made by the Director of the Census and it shall
require him to do so if it deems the Attorney General's refusal to
request such survey or census to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
   SEC. 14. (a) All cases of criminal contempt arising under the pro- tem'^t'^^roceed.'
visions of this Act shall be governed by section 151 of the Civil Eights ing^,
A c t o f 1957 (42 U.S.C. 1995).        _                      . . .        ^^ ^*^*-"«•
   (b) No court other than the District Court for the District of
Columbia or a court of appeals in any proceeding under section 9
shall have jurisdiction to issue any declaratory judgment pursuant to
section 4 or section 5 or any restraining order or temporary or perma-
nent injunction against the execution or enforcement of any provision
of this Act or any action of any Federal officer or employee pursuant
hereto.
                                                                           " V o t e " or
   (c) (1) The terms "vote" or "voting" shall include all action neces- "voting."
sary to make a vote effective in any primary, special, or general elec-
tion, including, but not limited to, registration, listing pursuant to
this Act, or other action required by law prerequisite to voting, casting
a ballot, and having such ballot counted properly and included in the
appi'opriate totals of votes cast with respect to candidates for public
or party office and propositions for which votes are received in an
election.
   (2) The term "political subdivision" shall mean any county or ^.*T?^"^,*;^^ ^"^"
parish, except that where registration for voting is not conducted
under the supervision of a county or parish, the term shall include any
other subdivision of a State which conducts registration for voting.
   (d) In any action for a declaratory judgment brought pursuant subpenas.
to section 4 or section 5 of this Act, subpenas for witnesses who are
required to attend the District Court for the District of Columbia may
be served in any judicial district of the United States: Provided^ That
no writ of subpena shall issue for witnesses without the District of
Columbia at a greater distance than one hundred miles from the place
of holding court without the permission of the District Court for the
District of Columbia being first had upon proper application and
cause shown.
   SEC. 15. Section 2004 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1971),
as amended by section 131 of the Civil Rights Act of 1957 (71 Stat.
637), and amended by section 601 of the Civil Rights Act of 1960
(74 Stat. 90), and as further amended by section 101 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 (78 Stat. 241), is further amended as follows:
   (a) Delete the word "Federal" wherever it appears in subsections
 (a) and ( c ) ;
   (b) Repeal subsection (f) and designate the present subsections Repeal,
 (g) and (h) as (f) and ( g ) , respectively.
   SEC. 16. The Attorney General and the Secretary of Defense, ^^^^^%^^^^^^'
jointly, shall make a full and complete study to determine whether, Itud"! "^'^
under the laws or practices of any State or States, there are pre-
conditions to voting, which might tend to result in discrimination
against citizens serving in the Armed Forces of the United States
seeking to vote. Such officials shall, jointly, make a report to the ^^1^°^^ *° ^°""
Congress not later than June 30, 1966, containing the results of such gress.
study, together with a list of any States in which such preconditions
exist, and shall include in such report such recommendations for
legislation as they deem advisable to prevent discrimination in
voting against citizens serving in the Armed Forces of the United
States.
446                                            PUBLIC LAW 89-111-AUGUST 6, 1965                 [79   STAT.

                                 SEC. 17. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to deny, impair, or
                              otherwise adversely affect the right to vote of any person registered to
                              vote under the law of any State or political subdivision.
    Appropriation.               g^c. 18. There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums
                              as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
                                 SEC. 19. If any provision of this Act or the application thereof to
                              any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Act
                              and the application of the provision to other persons not similarly
                              situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
                                 Approved August 6, 1965.


                              Public Law 89-111
   August 6, 1965                                              AN ACT
    [H. R. 903]
                              To add certain lands to the Kings Canyon National Park in tlie State of
                                                 California, and for other purposes.

                                 Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the
  Kings Canyon                United States of America in Congress assembled^ That all lands in
National P a r k ,
Calif.                        Tehipite Valley within the Sierra National Forest lying north of a
  Addition of                 line described as follows:
lands.
                                     Beginning at a point on the existing west boundary of the
                                   Kings Canyon National Park on the hydrographic divide on the
                                   southwest side of the Gorge of Despair in section 13, township
                                   12 south, range 29 east, Mount Diablo base and meridian, being
                                   the crest of a ridge designated as Silver Spur;
                                     thence following the crest of Silver Spur westerly to the inter-
                                   section with the west line of section 14, township 12 south, range
                                   29 east; thence northwesterly in a straight line across the middle
                                   fork of the Kings River to the point of intersection of the right
                                   bank of a stream or intermittent, stream and the 4,400-foot contour
                                   north of Tombstone Ridge, in section 15, township 12 south,
                                   range 29 east, being a point on the existing west boundary of the
                                   park;
                              and all lands in the Cedar Grove area of the Sequoia National Forest
                              lying east of the west section lines of sections 11 and 14, township 13
                              south, range 30 east, Mount Diablo base and meridian, are hereby
                              excluded from the said national forests and made a part of the Kings
                              Canyon National Park, subject to all the laws and regulations appli-
                              cable to such park.
                                 Approved August 6, 1965.


                              Public Law 89-112
   August 6, 1965                                                AN ACT
    [H. R. 8620]              To amend the Agricultural Act of 1949 and the Agricultural Adjustment Act
                                of 1938, to take into consideration floods and other natural disasters in
                                reference to the feed grains, cotton, and wheat programs for 1965.

                                Be it enacted hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the
  Feed grains,                United States of America in Congress assemhled^ That section 105(d)
cotton, wheat
programs, 1965.               of the Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended, is amended by adding
  F l o o d s , other         at the end thereof the following:
natural d i s a s t e r s .
  77 Stat. 44.                   "An acreage on the farm which the Secretary finds was not planted
  7 u s e 1441                to feed grains in 1965 because of flood, drought, or other natural
note.
                              disaster shall be deemed by the Secretary to be an actual acreage of
                              feed grains planted on the farm for harvest for purposes of this sub-
